Document metrics in Tarantool 3.0 (#4348)
tarantool/doc: doc/book/admin/monitoring/getting_started.rst

..  _monitoring-getting_started:

Getting started with monitoring
===============================

Example on GitHub: `sharded_cluster_crud_metrics <https://github.com/tarantool/doc/tree/latest/doc/code_snippets/snippets/sharding/instances.enabled/sharded_cluster_crud_metrics>`_

Tarantool allows you to configure and expose its :ref:`metrics <metrics-reference>` using a :ref:`YAML configuration <configuration>`.

> You can also use the :ref:`metrics <metrics-api_reference>` module to create and collect custom metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use the built-in :ref:`metrics <metrics-api_reference>` module to create and collect custom metrics.
```
This addition may be helpful for users of previous versions where metrics wasn't on board.

.. _monitoring_configuring_metrics:

Configuring metrics
-------------------

To configure metrics, use the :ref:`metrics <configuration_reference_metrics>` section in a cluster configuration.

> The configuration below enables all metrics, excluding :ref:`Vinyl <metrics-reference-vinyl>`-specific ones:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configuration below enables all metrics excluding :ref:`vinyl <metrics-reference-vinyl>`-specific ones:
```
`vynil` seems to be all-lowercase: https://docs.d.tarantool.io/en/doc/metrics/concepts/engines/vinyl/

Reviewer: Also, `excluding.. ` is a restrictive clause, so no comma is needed.

..  literalinclude:: /code_snippets/snippets/sharding/instances.enabled/sharded_cluster_crud_metrics/config.yaml
    :start-at: metrics:
    :end-at: instance_name
    :language: yaml
    :dedent:

> The ``metrics.labels`` option accepts the predefined :ref:`{{ instance_name }} <configuration_predefined_variables>` variable to use an instance name as a :ref:`label <metrics-api_reference-labels>` to be added to every observation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``metrics.labels`` option accepts the predefined :ref:`{{ instance_name }} <configuration_predefined_variables>` variable. This adds an instance name as a :ref:`label <metrics-api_reference-labels>` to every observation.
```
Just an idea: shorter sentences, simpler wording.

Third-party Lua modules, like `crud <https://github.com/tarantool/crud>`_ or `expirationd <https://github.com/tarantool/expirationd>`_, offer their own metrics.
You can enable these metrics by :ref:`configuring the corresponding role <configuration_application_roles_configure>`.
The example below shows how to enable statistics on called operations by providing the ``roles.crud-router`` role's configuration:

..  literalinclude:: /code_snippets/snippets/sharding/instances.enabled/sharded_cluster_crud_metrics/config.yaml
    :language: yaml
    :start-after: routers:
    :end-at: stats_quantiles
    :dedent:

``expirationd`` metrics can be enabled as follows:

..  code-block:: yaml

    expirationd:
      cfg:
        metrics: true

> 

Reviewer: Can we provide some "learn more" for this section? For example, read the module docs or ..?

Author: I hope, the link to `expirationd` readme should be enough.  Moreover, there is no additional info in the `expirationd` readme about metrics.

..  _monitoring_exposing_metrics:

Exposing metrics
----------------

> To expose metrics in different formats, you can use a third-party `metrics-export-role <https://github.com/tarantool/metrics-export-role>`__ role.

Reviewer: I wonder if `third-party` is correct here. It look like an official Tarantool component, judging by the GitHub repo. The role may not be available out of the box, but it's from the Tarantool _party_.

.. _monitoring_create_metrics:

Creating custom metrics
-----------------------

The ``metrics`` module allows you to create and collect custom metrics.
The example below shows how to collect the number of data operations performed on the specified space by increasing a ``counter`` value inside the :ref:`on_replace() <box_space-on_replace>` trigger function:

..  literalinclude:: /code_snippets/snippets/config/instances.enabled/metrics_collect_custom/examples/collect_custom_replace_count.lua
    :start-after: -- Collect a custom metric
    :end-before: -- End
    :language: lua
    :dedent:

Learn more in :ref:`metrics-api_reference_custom_metrics`.

..  _monitoring_collecting_metrics:

Collecting metrics
------------------

When metrics are configured and exposed, you can use the desired third-party tool to collect them.
Below is the example of a Prometheus scrape configuration that collects metrics of multiple Tarantool instances:

..  literalinclude:: /code_snippets/snippets/sharding/instances.enabled/sharded_cluster_crud_metrics/prometheus/prometheus.yml
    :language: yaml
    :dedent:

> For more information on collecting and visualizing metrics, refer to :ref:`monitoring-grafana_dashboard-page`.

Reviewer: There is also cluster monitoring functionality in TCM: https://docs.d.tarantool.io/en/doc/metrics/reference/tooling/tcm/tcm_cluster_metrics/
Perhaps we should cross-link these pages or add a short subsection about TCM here.

Reviewer 2: There is, but Grafana dashbard page is designed for per-instance metrics collect, and several panels won't work properly with TCM. (And we don't plan to change this approach.)

Author: It's okay, TCM is mentioned rather as an alternative
